resolve CF comments (#69)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/svm.qmd

---

{{< include _setup.qmd >}}

# Support Vector Machines {#sec-surv-ml-models-svm}

{{< include _wip_minor.qmd >}}

Support vector machines are a popular class of model in regression and classification settings due to their ability to make accurate predictions for complex high-dimensional, non-linear data.

> In survival analysis, survival support vector machines (SSVMs), are one of the few classes that can directly estimate survival times.

Author: ```suggestion
In survival analysis, survival support vector machines (SSVMs), are one of the few model classes that can directly estimate survival times.
```

However, experiments with SSVMs have demonstrated that they are best used for ranking predictions as their survival time predictions can be wildly out of range.
As a consequence, SSVMs cannot easily be used to make distribution predictions.
As usual this chapter starts with SVMs in the regression setting before moving to adaptions for survival analysis.

## SVMs for Regression

In simple linear regression, the aim is to estimate the line $y = b + x\beta_1$ by estimating the $b,\beta_1$ coefficients.
As the number of coefficients increases, the goal is to instead estimate the *hyperplane*, which divides the higher-dimensional space into two separate parts.
To visualize a hyperplane, imagine looking at a room from a birds eye view that has a dividing wall cutting the room into two halves (@fig-svm-hyper).
In this view, the room appears to have two dimensions (x=left-right, y=top-bottom) and the divider is a simple line of the form $y = b + x\beta_1$.

> In reality, this room is actually three dimensional and has a third dimension (z=up-down) and the divider is therefore a hyperplane of the form $y = b + x\beta_1 + z\beta_2$.

Author: I disagree just because when talking about 3D space it's most commonly represent as x-axis, y-axis, z-axis

![Visualising a hyperplane by viewing a 3D room in two-dimensions with a wall that is now seen as a simple line. When standing in this room, the wall will clearly exist in three dimensional space.](Figures/svm/hyperplane.png){#fig-svm-hyper fig-alt="AI generated image of a birds-eye view of an office cut in half by a dividing wall." width=400}

> Continuing the linear regression example, consider a simple model where the objective is to find the $\bb$ coefficients that minimize $\sum^n_{i=1} (g(\xx_i) - y_i)^2$ where $g(\xx_i) = b + \xx_i\beta_1$ and $(\XX, \yy)$ is training data such that $\XX \in \Reals^{n \times p}$ and $\yy \in \Reals^n$.

Author: ```suggestion
Continuing the linear regression example, consider a simple model where the objective is to find the $\bb$ coefficients that minimize $\sum^n_{i=1} (g(\xx_i) - y_i)^2$ where $g(\xx_i) = b + \xx_i\bb$ and $(\XX, \yy)$ is training data such that $\XX \in \Reals^{n \times p}$ and $\yy \in \Reals^n$.
```

Define $L$ as the set of observations with a finite lower-bounded time, which can be seen above to be those that are right-censored or uncensored, and define $U$ as the analogous set of observations with a finite upper-bounded time, which are those that are left-censored or uncensored.

Consider these definitions in the context of the constraints in @eq-svm-survnaive.
The first constraint ensures the hyperplane is greater than some lower-bound created by subtracting the slack parameter from the true outcome -- given the set definitions above this constraint only has meaning for observations with a finite lower-bound, $i \in L$, otherwise the constraint would include $g(\xx_i) \geq -\infty$, which is clearly not useful.
Similarly the second constraint ensures the hyperplane is less than some upper-bound, which again can only be meaningful for observations $i \in U$.
Restricting the constraints in this way leads to the optimization problem [@Shivaswamy2007] below and visualised in @fig-svm-surv:

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \min_{\bb, b, \xi, \xi^*} \frac{1}{2}\|\bb\|^2 + \gamma\Big(\sum_{i \in U} \xi_i + \sum_{i \in L} \xi_i^*\Big) \\
& \textrm{subject to}
\begin{dcases}

> g(\xx_i) & \geq t_i -\xi_i, i \in L \\

Author: where later?

\end{aligned}
$$

> If no one is censored then the optimisation becomes the regression optimisation in (@eq-svm-opt).

Author: ```suggestion
If no observations are censored then the optimization becomes the regression optimization in (@eq-svm-opt).
```

$\forall i\in 1,...,n$. With the prediction for a new observation $\xx^*$ calculated as,

$$
\hatg(\xx^*) = \sum^n_{i=1} \alpha^*_i K(\xx_i, \xx^*) - \delta_i\alpha_i'K(\xx_i, \xx^*) + b
$$

Where again $K$ is a kernel function and the calculation of the Lagrange multipliers is beyond the scope of this book.

![Visualising a survival time SVM. Blue diamonds are influential support vectors, which are uncensored or left-censored when $g(\xx)<t$ or uncensored or right-censored when $g(\xx)>t$. Red circles are non-influential observations.](Figures/svm/survival.png){#fig-svm-surv fig-alt="Line graph with g(x) on the y-axis and 'x' on the x-axis. A solid black line labelled 'y' runs along g(x)=x, i.e., from the bottom-left to the top-right of the graph. Red circles and blue dots lie on both sides of the line. Blue dots above the line represent observations with finite upper bounds and blue dots below the line represent observations with finite lower bounds. The blue dots are labelled to show they represent the distance xi* and xi." width=500}

### Ranking SSVMs

Support vector machines can be used to estimate rankings by penalizing predictions that result in disconcordant predictions.

> Recall the definition of concordance from @sec-eval-crank: ranking predictions for a pair of comparable observations $(i, j)$ where $t_i < t_j \cap \delta_i = 1$, are called concordant if $r_i > r_j$ where $r_i, r_j$ are the predicted ranks for observations $i$ and $j$ respectively where a higher value implies greater risk.

Author: ```suggestion
Recall the definition of concordance from @sec-eval-crank: ranking predictions for a pair of comparable observations $(i, j)$ where $t_i < t_j \cap \delta_i = 1$, are called concordant if $r_i > r_j$ where $r_i, r_j$ are the predicted ranks for observations $i$ and $j$ respectively and a higher value implies greater risk.
```

> where $CP$ is the set of comparable pairs defined by $CP = \{(i, j) : t_i < t_j \wedge \delta_i = 1\}$.

Author: it will fall off the page and look terrible if I do that

Given the number of pairs, the optimization problem quickly becomes difficult to solve with a very long runtime.
To solve this problem @VanBelle2011b found an efficient reduction that sorts observations in order of outcome time and then compares each data point $i$ with the observation with the next smallest *survival* time, skipping over censored observations.
For example, consider the observed outcomes, unsorted on the left and sorted on the right:

| Index | Unsorted | Sorted |
| ---   |   ---    |   ---  |
| 1 | $(t_1 = 2, \delta_1 = 1)$ | $(t_1 = 2, \delta_1 = 1)$
| 2 | $(t_2 = 4, \delta_2 = 1)$ | $(t_2 = 3, \delta_2 = 0)$
| 3 | $(t_3 = 3, \delta_3 = 0)$ | $(t_3 = 4, \delta_3 = 1)$
| 4| $(t_4 = 8, \delta_4 = 0)$ | $(t_4 = 8, \delta_4 = 0)$

Once sorted, the reduced set of observations and survival times to compare are

> | Comparable observations | Survival times |

Author: Create a sliding window graphic to show how ordered pairs are compared with skipping over censoring

> | Comparable observations | Survival times |

Author: Let me know what you think

### Hybrid SSVMs

Finally, @VanBelle2011b noted that the ranking algorithm could be updated to add the constraints of the regression model, thus providing a model that simultaneously optimizes for ranking whilst providing continuous values that can be interpreted as survival time predictions.
This results in the hybrid SSVM with constraints $\forall i = 1,...,n$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \min_{\bb, b, \xi, \xi', \xi^*} \frac{1}{2}\|\bb\|^2 + \textcolor{CornflowerBlue}{\gamma\sum_{i =1}^n \xi_i} + \textcolor{Rhodamine}{\mu \sum^n_{i=1}(\xi_i' + \xi_i^*)} \\
& \textrm{subject to}
\begin{dcases}
\textcolor{CornflowerBlue}{g(\xx_i) - g(\xx_{j(i)})} & \textcolor{CornflowerBlue}{\geq t_i - t_{j(i)} - \xi_i} \\
\textcolor{Rhodamine}{g(\xx_i)} & \textcolor{Rhodamine}{\leq t_i + \xi^*_i, i:\delta_i=1} \\
\textcolor{Rhodamine}{g(\xx_i)} & \textcolor{Rhodamine}{\geq t_i - \xi'_i} \\
\textcolor{CornflowerBlue}{\xi_i}, \textcolor{Rhodamine}{\xi_i', \xi_i^*} & \geq 0 \\
\end{dcases}
\end{aligned}

> \label{eq:surv_ssvmvb2}

Reviewer: There is some confusion below (line 227f): blue parts = ranking but gamma = regression. 
Overall, I think I would introduce the $\xi$ for the ranking part $\xi'$, so that the $\xi$ and $xi*$ remain their notation from the regression part and the $\xi'$ is uniquely used for ranking. and use $\mu \sum \xi'$ in ranking, so everything is introduced the same way as it will be used in the hybrid part

Reviewer: Line 229: Don't get the meaning of this sentence

Reviewer: L255: "wide domain" -> "wide range/space"?

Author: > Line 229: Don't get the meaning of this sentence

@adibender  do you remember which?
